@node  The settings file, Qingy Themes, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter The ``settings'' file

The main configuration file for Qingy is
@file{/etc/qingy/settings}. All global settings for Qingy are found in
this file. 

A typical @file{settings} file might look like this: 

@verbatim

# Directory containing X sessions
x_sessions = "/etc/X11/Sessions/"

# Directory containing text mode sessions
text_sessions = "/etc/qingy/sessions/"

# Full path to the 'xinit' executable
xinit = "/usr/X11R6/bin/xinit"

screensaver photos =
       "/mnt/docs/pics/Space/deep",
       "/mnt/docs/pics/Space/moon&sun",
       "/mnt/docs/pics/screensaver_pics",  

# What theme do you want (you can also specify 'random')
theme = random

# theme = "default"

# Who is allowed to shut down the system?
# Allowed options are 'everyone', 'root', 'noone'

shutdown_policy = everyone

@end verbatim

It is pretty self-explicative: so let's see what else can we do with
it: @code{screensaver} can also be set to @samp{pixel}. In that case,
no @samp{= "/paths/..."} is required. The photos screensaver will
display randomly the pictures it finds in the specified directories,
while pixel will just randomly display a pixel on the otherwise
blanked screen.

Theme can be set to random (without quotes, that means you can have an
actual theme called @samp{random}...) or to a real theme by quoting
its name (@pxref{Qingy Themes} for more details on theming in Qingy).

Also, you can set global theme settings in the @file{settings} file,
much like you'd do in a @file{theme} file (again, @pxref{Qingy Themes}
for better covering of the... well... theme). So, if you had in your
@file{settings} file something like:

@verbatim

#...

theme="default"
theme {
      background = "/var/logo.jpeg"
}

#...

@end verbatim

You'd be displaying the default theme with a different background
(namely, @file{/var/logo/jpeg}.  

@emph{Note: this nice trick doesn't actually work when it would be
most useful: along with a @code{theme = default} command. Bear with
us. We'll try to have that working soon enough...}

